.TH LUNAS "1" "Aug 2024"

.SH  NAME
.B lunas
-  A syncing cli tool that can handle more than two directories locally and remotely

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lunas [OPTIONS] [PATH OPTIONS [PATHS]]
.br
.B lunas [PATH OPTIONS [PATHS]] [OPTIONS]
.br
.B lunas [PATH OPTIONS [PATHS]] [ON/OFF OPTIONS] # not providing on or off, defaults to on
.br
.B lunas [PATH OPTIONS [PATHS]] [ON/OFF OPTIONS] <on/off>
.br

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lunas 
is a versatile file syncing tool that is capable of syncing between multiples of local to local, remote to local, local to remote,
.br 
and remote to remote directories.
.br

It can sync two-ways between directories (from A to B and from B to A), unless source and destination options are used. read the OPTIONS section
.br

By default, lunas only syncs files that do not already exist in destination directories
.br
to overwrite older or newer files, --update or --rollback can be used
.br

For convenient syncing of recurring operations, lunas has a simple-to-use config file. check the 'CONFIG FILE' section for more details

.SH USAGE
.B NOT READY !
.br

.B lunas -p dir1 -p dir2 -r user@ip:dir3 -rd user2@ip2:dir4 --update --compression --compression-level 9
.br
.B lunas -s dir1 -rd user@ip:dir2 --update --compression --compression-level 9
.br
.B lunas --config preset_name --update off --compression-level 9

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B [-p, --path] <dir>

path of the directory to be synced. this option can be used many times to sync multiple directories

.TP
.B [-s, -src, --source] </path/to/dir>

path of the source local directory. this option can be used many times to sync multiple directories

.TP
.B [-d, -dest, --destination] </path/to/dir>

path of the destination local directory. this option can be used many times to sync multiple directories

.TP
.B [-r, --remote-path] <user@ip:/path/to/dir>

path of the remote sftp directory to be synced. this option can be used many times to sync multiple directories

.TP
.B [N=NUMBER, port=NUMBER]

the port number. this option, if used, must come after the relevant remote path. It defaults to 22, if the option is not used
        example: -rdest user@ip:/path/to/dir port=NUMBER

.TP
.B [pw=PASSWORD, password=PASSWORD]

password of the remote directory, this option, if used, must come after the relevant remote path.

        example:  -r user@ip:/path/to/dir port=NUMBER password=PASSWORD
        example:  -r user@ip:/path/to/dir pw=PASSWORD N=NUMBER

.TP
.B [-rs, -rsrc, --remote-source] <user@ip:/path/to/dir>

path of the remote source sftp directory. this option can be used many times to sync multiple directories

.TP
.B [-rd, -rdest, --remote-destination] <user@ip:/path/to/dir>

path of the remote destination sftp directory. this option can be used many times to sync multiple directories

.TP
.B [-C, --compression]

enable compression in remote transfer, zlib is used

.TP
.B [-CL, --compression-level] <level>

chose the compression level, 1-9, 9 being the most efficient but slower

.TP
.B [-mkdir, --make-directory]

make any input directory if it doesn't exists, locally and remotely

.TP
.B [-x, --exclude] <relative/path/inside/input/dir>

exclude a path from getting synced. this option can be used many times to *exclude* multiple directories/files

	# only relative path starting from inside the input dir '/dir1/dir2/' like dir3/dir or dir3/file is allowed
.br

		example:  -r user@ip:/dir1/dir2/ -x dir3/dir -x dir3/file -x this_file_is_inside_dir2
.br
		example:  -p /dir1/dir2/ -x dir3/dir -x dir3/file -x dir3/dir4/dir5 -x this_dir_is_inside_dir2
.br

	# a /full/path or regular ./relative/paths aren't allowed, and would get ignored
.br

.TP
.B [-xp, --exclude-pattern] <pattern>

exclude a path with a pattern from getting synced. this option can be used many times to *exclude* multiple patterns

.TP
.B [-F, --fsync]

synchronize the copied file with the filesystem

.TP
.B [-L, --dereference]

follow symlinks. sync the target the symlink is pointing to instead of the symlink itself

.TP
.B [-a, --attributes] <own,gid=off,uid=on,utimes,atime,mtime,all>
   
sync file attributes. own, ownership, is for uid and gid. utimes is for atime and mtime. all is for all attributes
.br
mtime is enabled by default, to disable it --attributes mtime=off
.br
--attributes own # ON
.br
--attributes own=on # ON
.br
--attributes own=off # OFF

        example: -r user@ip:/path/to/dir port=NUMBER -a all,mtime=off
        example: -r user@ip:/path/to/dir -a uid,gid,atime=on

--attributes all,mtime=off # this turns every attributes on then mtime off
.br
--attributes mtime=off,all # this turns mtime off, then every attributes on INCLUDING mtime

.TP
.B [-B, --no-broken-link]

don't sync broken symlinks 

.TP
.B [-ms, --minimum-space] <sizeUnit>

prevent a partition from filling up by setting a threshold to prevent syncing files to it once it's reached. default is 1GiB
.br
possible units are kib, mib, gib, tib, pib. a number without a unit is considered bytes

        example: -p dir -p dir2 -ms 0.5Tib
        example: -p dir -p dir2 -ms 100mib

.TP
.B [-R, --resume]

resume interrupted file transfer. enabled by default

files are copied to 'file.HASH.ls.part' before they are renamed to their original name 'file', HASH = hash(full_path_of_src + its_mtime) 

this is done to ensure if the src of an interrupted file was modified or --rollback was used instead of --update with multiple 
.br
input paths it doesn't resume with a wrong src

in case the srcs for 'file.HASH.ls.part' didn't produce the same HASH, it is considered orphaned and removed

if no src was found to check, then 'file.HASH.ls.part' is ignored

if 'file' and 'file.HASH.ls.part' both exists at destination and 'file' has the same mtime of its src, then the 'file.HASH.ls.part' is removed

if "-R, --resume off" is used, then file.HASH.ls.part is removed regardless

.TP
.B [-rmx, --remove-extra]

remove extra files in destinations that don't exist in at least one source

        example: -s /path/to/dir1 -s /path/to/dir2 -d /path/to/dir3 -d /path/to/dir4 --remove-extra 

files that don't exist in 'dir1' AND 'dir2' but exists in 'dir3' or/and 'dir4' would be removed from 'dir3' or/and 'dir4'

if files exist in -p or -r paths, they wouldn't be removed from -d or -rd paths, since -p and -r are src+dest i.e they are still sources

.TP
.B [-u, --update]

check mtime of files and re-sync the file if mtime wasn't the same. this option enables -a mtime. the destination file, if exists, gets removed then re-synced again. it replaces old mtime files with newer mtime ones.

[-rb, --rollback] can be used to replace newer files with older ones

        example: -s /path/to/dir -rd user@ip:/path/to/dir port=NUMBER -u
        example:  -p /path/to/dir -p /path/to/dir2 -p /path/to/dir3 -r user@ip:/path/to/dir4 port=NUMBER pw=PASSWORD -u

.TP
.B [-P, --progress]

enable progress bar for copied files

.TP
.B [-v, --verbose]

print the source of which files/dirs were copied from not just the destination

.TP
.B [-q, --quiet]

disable print statements and only print errors

.TP
.B [-dr, --dry-run]

outputs what would be synced without actually syncing them

.TP
.B [--author]

print the program's author

.TP
.B [-h, --help]

print the help statement


.SH CONFIG FILE
.B where presets of certain paths and options to be defined with a preset name.
.br
the way to run a preset is with 'lunas -c NAME' after defining this preset in the config file.

.B config file syntax

- presets are defined by encapsulating options and nested options within {}
.br
- options use a simple key=value pair where each key is seperated from its value with an '=' sign
.br
- 'nest {' must be on its own line
.br
- every key=value option must be on a different line
.br
- closing '}' must be on its own line
.br
- nested options, such as "remote", are also encapsulated within {} and options inside it are key=value pairs
.br
- # commenting lines is done like '# key = value'
.br

.B     ------------------------------------------------------

.B inside the file '~/.config/lunas/lunas.luco'

.B     ------------------------------------------------------
        NAME{
                path = /path/to/dir
                remote-path = user@ip:/path/to/dir
                rdest = user@ip:/path/to/dir
                dry-run = on
                #progress = on
                #verbose = on

                remote{
                        r = user@ip:/path/to/dir
                        pw = PASSWORD
                        port = 22
                }
         }
        luna{
                path = /path/to/dir
                d = /path/to/dir2
                dereference = on
                update = on
        }
    
.B     ------------------------------------------------------

.B options names are similar to cli options. options that toggle things on/off, have a value of <on/off>

.B lunas can handle having multiple predefined presets in the config file with unique names

.B more paths can be added from the cli to when running a preset, this won't edit the file

        lunas -c preset -p /path/to/dir -dr on
        lunas -c preset -p /path/to/dir -dr off

.B this command would add /path/to/dir to the to-be-synced paths from the nest
.br
and toggle --dry-run 'on' or 'off', this would override what's in the preset only if -dr was after -c option not before it

.B A GLOBAL PRESET. a global preset with the name 'global' can be defined which runs at every cli instance and along with any other preset
.br
<on/off> options in other presets and cli options override what's in the global preset.

        global{ # a comment before any preset name hides it
                #path = /path/to/dir
                #d = /path/to/dir2
                mkdir = on
                update = on
                resume = on
                progress = on
                compression = on
                compression-level = 9
        }

.SH BUGS
You could report bugs and request features at https://github.com/nodeluna/lunas/issues

.SH COPYRIGHT
copyright © 2024 nodeluna

licese GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later. https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html

.SH AUTHOR
.PP 

nodeluna - nodeluna@proton.me

https://github.com/nodeluna
